BasicObject/enum/enum.md, before:

# enum

### category

* [related file](#related-file)
* [memory layout](#memory-layout)
* [example](#example)
	* [normal](#normal)
	* [en_longindex](#en_longindex)

#### related file
* cpython/Objects/enumobject.c
* cpython/Include/enumobject.h
* cpython/Objects/clinic/enumobject.c.h

#### memory layout

**enumerate** is a **type**, the instance of **enumerate** object is an iterable object, you can iter through the real delegated object and counting index at the same time

![layout](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/layout.png)

#### example

##### normal

    def gen():
        yield "I"
        yield "am"
        yield "handsome"

    e = enumerate(gen())

    >>> type(e)
    <class 'enumerate'>

before iter through the object **e**, the **en_index** field is 0, **en_sit** stores the actual generator object being iterated, **en_result** stores the previous result

we will see the meaning of **en_longindex** later

![example0](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example0.png)

    >>> t1 = next(e)
    >>> t1
    (0, 'I')
    >>> id(t1)
    4469348888

now, the **en_index** becomes 1, the tuple in **en_result** is the last tuple object returned, the elements in the tuple are changed, but the address **en_result** doesn't change, not because of the [free-list mechanism in tuple](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/tuple/tuple.md#free-list)

it's a trick in the **enumerate** iterating function

    static PyObject *
    enum_next(enumobject *en)
    {
    	/* omit */
        PyObject *result = en->en_result;
		/* omit */
        if (result->ob_refcnt == 1) {
        	/* reference count of the tuple object is 1
              the only count is from the current enumerate object
              since we no longer need the old two element in tuple
              we can reset it instead of creating a new one
              */
            Py_INCREF(result);
            old_index = PyTuple_GET_ITEM(result, 0);
            old_item = PyTuple_GET_ITEM(result, 1);
            PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 0, next_index);
            PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 1, next_item);
            Py_DECREF(old_index);
            Py_DECREF(old_item);
            return result;
        }
        /*
        reach here, there are other reference to the old tuple
        we must create a new one instead of reset it
        */
        result = PyTuple_New(2);
        if (result == NULL) {
            Py_DECREF(next_index);
            Py_DECREF(next_item);
            return NULL;
        }
        PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 0, next_index);
        PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 1, next_item);
        return result;
    }

it's clear, because only the current enumerate object keep a reference to the old `tuple object -> (None, None)` **enum_next** reset the 0th element in the tuple to 0, and 1th element in the tuple to 'I', so the address **en_result** points to is the same

![example1](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example1.png)

because the reference count of the tuple object `(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)` now becomes 2, one from the enumerate object and one from variable t1, the **enum_next** function will create and return a new tuple instead of resetting the one stored in **en_result**

the **en_index** incremented, and **en_result** points to the old tuple object`(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)`

	>>> next(e)
	(1, 'am')

![example2](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example2.png)

after `del t1`, the reference count of tuple object `(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)` becomes 1, so **enum_next** will reset the tuple **en_result** pointed to and returns it again

	>>> del t1 # decrement the reference count of the object referenced by t1
	>>> next(e)
	(2, 'handsome')

![example3](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example3.png)

the termination state is indicated by the object inside the **en_sit** field, nothing changed in the **enumerate** object

    >>> next(e)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    StopIteration

![example3](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example3.png)

##### en_longindex

usually, the **index** of enumerate object is stored in the **en_index** field, **en_index** is of type **Py_ssize_t** in c, and **Py_ssize_t** is defined as

    #ifdef HAVE_SSIZE_T
    typedef ssize_t         Py_ssize_t;
    #elif SIZEOF_VOID_P == SIZEOF_SIZE_T
    typedef Py_intptr_t     Py_ssize_t;
    #else
    #   error "Python needs a typedef for Py_ssize_t in pyport.h."
    #endif

most time it's a **ssize_t**, which is type **int** in 32-bit os and **long int** in 64-bit os

in my machine it's type **long int**

what if the index is so big that a signed 64-bit can't hold ?

	e = enumerate(gen(), 1 << 62)

the **en_index** can hold the value

![longindex0](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/longindex0.png)

the max value **en_index** can represent is ((1 << 63) - 1) (PY_SSIZE_T_MAX)

now the actual index is larger than PY_SSIZE_T_MAX, so the **en_longindex** is used for represent the actual index

what **en_longindex** points to is a [PyLongObject(python type int)](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/long/long.md), which can represent variable size integer

	>>> e = enumerate(gen(), (1 << 63) + 100)

![longindex1](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/longindex1.png)

Commit message:

enum done and readme change category to content readme move learning material down

BasicObject/enum/enum.md, after:

# enum

### contents

* [related file](#related-file)
* [memory layout](#memory-layout)
* [example](#example)
	* [normal](#normal)
	* [en_longindex](#en_longindex)

#### related file
* cpython/Objects/enumobject.c
* cpython/Include/enumobject.h
* cpython/Objects/clinic/enumobject.c.h

#### memory layout

**enumerate** is a **type**, the instance of **enumerate** object is an iterable object, you can iter through the real delegated object and counting index at the same time

![layout](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/layout.png)

#### example

##### normal

    def gen():
        yield "I"
        yield "am"
        yield "handsome"

    e = enumerate(gen())

    >>> type(e)
    <class 'enumerate'>

before iter through the object **e**, the **en_index** field is 0, **en_sit** stores the actual generator object being iterated, **en_result** points a tuple object with two empty value

we will see the meaning of **en_longindex** later

![example0](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example0.png)

    >>> t1 = next(e)
    >>> t1
    (0, 'I')
    >>> id(t1)
    4469348888

now, the **en_index** becomes 1, the tuple in **en_result** is the last tuple object returned, the elements in the tuple are changed, but the address in **en_result** doesn't change, not because of the [free-list mechanism in tuple](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/tuple/tuple.md#free-list)

it's a trick in the **enumerate** iterating function

    static PyObject *
    enum_next(enumobject *en)
    {
    	/* omit */
        PyObject *result = en->en_result;
		/* omit */
        if (result->ob_refcnt == 1) {
        	/* reference count of the tuple object is 1
              the only count is from the current enumerate object
              since we no longer need the old two element in tuple
              we can reset it instead of creating a new one
              */
            Py_INCREF(result);
            old_index = PyTuple_GET_ITEM(result, 0);
            old_item = PyTuple_GET_ITEM(result, 1);
            PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 0, next_index);
            PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 1, next_item);
            Py_DECREF(old_index);
            Py_DECREF(old_item);
            return result;
        }
        /*
        reach here, there are other reference to the old tuple
        we must create a new one instead of reset it
        */
        result = PyTuple_New(2);
        if (result == NULL) {
            Py_DECREF(next_index);
            Py_DECREF(next_item);
            return NULL;
        }
        PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 0, next_index);
        PyTuple_SET_ITEM(result, 1, next_item);
        return result;
    }

it's clear, because only the current enumerate object keep a reference to the old `tuple object -> (None, None)` object

**enum_next** reset the 0th element in the tuple to 0, and 1th element in the tuple to 'I', so the address **en_result** points to is the same

![example1](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example1.png)

because the reference count of the tuple object `(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)` now becomes 2, one from the enumerate object and one from variable t1, the **enum_next** function will create and return a new tuple instead of resetting the one stored in **en_result**

the **en_index** incremented, and **en_result** points to the old tuple object`(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)`

	>>> next(e)
	(1, 'am')

![example2](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example2.png)

after `del t1`, the reference count of tuple object `(0, 'I') # id(4469348888)` becomes 1, so **enum_next** will reset the tuple **en_result** pointed to and returns it again

	>>> del t1 # decrement the reference count of the object referenced by t1
	>>> next(e)
	(2, 'handsome')

![example3](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example3.png)

the termination state is indicated by the object inside the **en_sit** field, nothing changed in the **enumerate** object

    >>> next(e)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    StopIteration

![example3](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/example3.png)

##### en_longindex

usually, the **index** of enumerate object is stored in the **en_index** field, **en_index** is of type **Py_ssize_t** in c, and **Py_ssize_t** is defined as

    #ifdef HAVE_SSIZE_T
    typedef ssize_t         Py_ssize_t;
    #elif SIZEOF_VOID_P == SIZEOF_SIZE_T
    typedef Py_intptr_t     Py_ssize_t;
    #else
    #   error "Python needs a typedef for Py_ssize_t in pyport.h."
    #endif

most time it's a **ssize_t**, which is type **int** in 32-bit os and **long int** in 64-bit os

in my machine it's type **long int**

what if the index is so big that a signed 64-bit can't hold ?

	e = enumerate(gen(), 1 << 62)

the **en_index** can hold the value

![longindex0](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/longindex0.png)

the max value **en_index** can represent is ((1 << 63) - 1) (PY_SSIZE_T_MAX)

now the actual index is larger than PY_SSIZE_T_MAX, so the **en_longindex** is used for represent the actual index

what **en_longindex** points to is a [PyLongObject(python type int)](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/long/long.md), which can represent variable size integer

	>>> e = enumerate(gen(), (1 << 63) + 100)

![longindex1](https://github.com/zpoint/CPython-Internals/blob/master/BasicObject/enum/longindex1.png)
